In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure and verify the IP settings on Windows, Mac and Linux clients.
I'll start off with Windows, and I'm on my Windows laptop here and I've got Windows File Explorer
open.
This is what I find to be the quickest and most convenient way to open the network settings,
but are other ways you can get there, such as going through the Control Panel.
The way I like to do it is in Windows File Explorer,
I will right-click on Network, and then choose Properties, and then I'll click on Change Adapter Settings,
and then I'll see all of my network cards here.
I've got a lot of network cards on my laptop, because I've got a lot of virtual cards because I've got
VMware installed.
I'm plugged in with an Ethernet cable right now on this interface here and if I wanted to configure the
settings,
I'll right-click on that and choose Properties,
and then in here, you can see that I can set my IP settings for both IPv4 and IPv6. So let's click
on IPv4 and then go to Properties, and you see that it defaults to obtaining an IP address automatically,
which means that by default, it is a DHCP client.
All of the client desktop operating systems will default to being DHCP clients.
If I wanted to configure a manual fixed IP address on here, I would just tick the radio button and
use the following IP address, and in there, I would enter my IP address, subnet mask, and default gateway,
and I would also configure my DNS server in here as well.
But I want to leave this as a DHCP client, so I'm going to select that. Notice in here in the GUI,
it does not actually tell me what the IP address is.
So to find the IP address,
what I'm going to do is open up a command prompt, so I'll go to the search bar and type in 'cmd'
to open up a command prompt and the command is 'ipconfig'.
Now, ipconfig will show you the main information. Normally, you want to do an 'ipconfig /all'
because this will show you extra information, such as the MAC address on your network cards,
also what the IP address of your DHCP server is. So, I'll enter that.
I'm getting loads of output because I've got so many network cards in here. So I'm going to scroll
all the way back up to the top again,
and in here, you can see there is the IP address, there's the subnet mask, and there is the default gateway.
I can also see other information in here, such as the DNS servers, the IP address of my DHCP server,
etc.
Okay, so that's how you set your IP address in Windows, and also how you verify it with the 'ipconfig'
command.
Next up, let's have a look at Mac.
So, I've got my Mac OS open here. To configure your IP address in Mac, go up to the top left, click
on the Apple icon here, and then select System Preferences,
and then click on Network.
And then you'll see with Mac, it's a little bit different than Windows. The GUI will actually tell
you directly in here what your IP address is.
Again, it's using DHCP by default,
and I can see my IP settings in here.
If I wanted to change this to be a manually set IP address, I just click on the dropdown and I would
choose Manually in there, and then that gives me the option to enter my IP information.
If I want to check this at the command line, then what I do is just open up a terminal, and in Windows,
it was 'ipconfig'. In Mac OS and in Linux, that you'll see in a second, it's 'ifconfig' for the interface.
So I'll enter 'ifconfig',
and in there, I can see same kind of information as I saw on Windows, my IP address, subnet mask,
etc.
This does not actually show me the default gateway, so to get that,
what I do is a 'netstat' and then '-r' for routes, and 'n' for numerical to see it in IP address
format, and hit Enter.
And in there, I can see there is my default
route, and there is my default gateway.
Okay, so in Mac, it was 'ifconfig' to see the IP address and subnet mask, and the 'netstat -rn' to see the
default gateway.
Okay, last one, let's have a look at Linux as well.
So I'll go on to my Linux machine here,
and then to configure your IP address on desktop Linux, so I've got Ubuntu desktop running on here,
which has got a GUI running on it by default, a Graphical User Interface,
I can click on the Show Applications in the bottom left here, then I'll click on Settings,
and then click on Network,
and I can see my network interface cards here. To configure it, I click on the settings icon, and then
I can see the settings in there on the Details tab.
So, that's where I can see my IP address information. To change it,
I click on the IPv4 tab. Again,
it defaults to DHCP and I could click on the Manual radio button here and configure my IP address,
subnet mask, default gateway, etc.
Okay, so that's where you can configure it.
If you want to verify it at the command line, then go to the applications again and then open
up a terminal window,
and on older versions of Linux, so you'll still see this on a lot of distributions, the command to use is
'ifconfig', the same as it was on Mac. You'll actually see that I'm running a newer version of Ubuntu desktop
here, which is why 'ifconfig' is not installed by default, I could install that if I wanted to just
by running this command here.
But I'll show you what the new command is,
and that is 'ip address show'.
And in there, I can see there is my IP address, and I can see it's a /24 subnet mask.
This doesn't show me my default gateway. To see that, it is 'ip route show' and there,
I can see my default gateway is at 192.168.1.1.
Okay, so the older command is 'ifconfig', the newer commands 'ip address show' and 'ip route show'.
So that was how to configure and verify your IP settings on Windows, on Mac, and on Linux.
See you in the next lecture.